The scripture that we are highlighting today is 1 Timothy 5, 2, which instructs Christian men to treat older women as mothers, younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.
Of course, the reverse is also true that Christian women should treat older men as fathers, and younger men as brothers, with all chasteness.
This is taken from the Watchtower article entitled We Can Remain Chaste, one portion of which discusses the matter of flirting with the opposite sex.
My discussion is going to focus on keeping one's ego in check.
Now, what are the connections between chasteness, flirting, and ego?
Let's start with chasteness, that is purity in thought and action, and it means being free from all taint of what is lured or salacious, that is what arouses or appeals to sexual desire or imagination.
And one way to maintain our chastity is to avoid the practice of flirting, and what is that?
Well, flirting means behaving amorously without serious intent, such a person signals romantic interest with no intention of marriage.
It may involve an inappropriate remark, a look, a touch, the tone of voice, a coy smile, even the way one dresses, stands, or carries oneself.
Some single people flirt with each other, or with married folks. Some married people flirt with single people, or with other married people.
And in this degenerate world, men flirt with men, and women flirt with women.
But it's inappropriate for single people to send romantic signals to each other just for amusement, and it is morally wrong for married people to direct that kind of attention to a person outside of their marriage.
Interestingly, an attorney who practices family law reported, I talked to plenty of people who are going through divorce.
In most cases, these marriages are ending because someone had an affair, and in all of those cases, the affair has started out as just a little harmless flirting.
Of course, flirting is not harmless. To intentionally toy with the feelings of others is cruel. It can arouse wrong desires and expectations that may result in a lot of emotional pain.
It can also lead to worse things, fornication, or adultery. It's no wonder it has been said that flirts make poor friends and worse marriage mates.
Well, in the world, flirting is viewed as a sport, and it's done to increase one's own self-esteem.
Now, that's where ego comes into the picture. Ego is the sense of one's own worth.
One source on the subject of flirting says it is a gigantic ego boost, an ego trip, because the flirt is doing something for his or her own gratification to make himself or herself feel better.
But there's something the Apostle Paul wrote that can balance our thinking about this trait of self-esteem that imperfect humans tend to take to an extreme.
So let's turn to Romans 12 and verse 3, and see what Paul has to say.
Romans 12 and verse 3.
He wrote, for through the undeserved kindness given to me, I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has given to him a measure of faith.
Now, self-esteem is defined as confidence and satisfaction in oneself, and it can range from self-respect to self-conceit. Some people have too little of it, some people have too much of it.
So Paul wrote, I tell everyone there among you.
And what he tells us is how to avoid either extreme of thinking too much or too little of our worth in God's eyes, and Paul pinpointed exactly where the problem lies.
Because three times in the verse he used the phrase, to think.
He wrote that a person is not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind.
So it matters how one thinks about himself or herself.
Consider the person who has too little self-esteem.
Now Paul said, it is necessary to think something of ourselves. It was never intended that modest moral Christians had to develop an inferiority complex.
Our dedicated relationship with Jehovah makes each of us precious and desirable to God, and we should really believe that.
So the one with low self-esteem is not thinking enough of the right things about himself.
And what Paul wrote two verses earlier in Romans chapter 12 can help.
So let's look at verse 1 of Romans 12.
Therefore I appeal to you by the compassion of God, brothers, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, a holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.
Now, doesn't that describe what we are endeavoring to do?
Haven't we dedicated our lives to Jehovah? Aren't we striving to live holy lives? Aren't we performing sacred service and making sacrifices for the sake of the kingdom? Certainly.
And all that is most acceptable to our God. Our lives have real worth in Jehovah's eyes.
So no one should have to resort to frivolous flirting to boost their ego.
Now consider the person who has too much self-esteem. In his efforts to gain self-confidence, he has overshot the mark, and has crossed the line between cultivating self-respect and arrogance.
He has overestimated his own worth, thanks to highly of himself, and may behave in an unpleasant way toward others as does the uncarrying flirt.
Well, Paul said something that applies here too at Romans 12 verse 16, verse 16.
Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves. Do not set your mind on lofty things, but be let along with the lolly things, do not become wise in your own eyes.
So it's important that we have a healthy balance view of our own worth.
And remember, it is the way of our thinking that Paul was cautionous about, because that governs whether our self-esteem is in balance or not.
No wonder that Paul said we ought to think so as to have a sound mind. That is, have thoughts that are based on a true premise about ourselves.
Since it always helps to look at the example of Jesus, let's do that. In this case, by turning to Philippians 2, beginning with verse 5,
it says, keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus, who although he was existing in God's form, gave no consideration to a seizure, namely that he should be equal to God.
Nobody emptied himself and took a slaves form and became human. More than that, when he came as a man, he humbled himself.
Well, in every facet of his life, Jesus' sound mind kept his self-esteem and perfect balance. He never had too little or too much.
He never thought more of himself than was necessary to think.
We can never imagine Jesus trying to boost his ego by flirting with Mary and Martha or with any other woman who is in his company.
Paul said, keep this mental attitude in you, Jesus' mental attitude. We should think the way Jesus thinks.
Now note the context in which we find this admonition at Philippians chapter 2 by reading verses 3 and 4.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism. One Bible says, never act from motives of rivalry or personal vanity, but with humility, consider others superior to you, as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
So, we keep our egos in check. We stay clear of any speech, dress, or flirtatious actions that could be viewed as provocative, and we thus maintain our chasteness toward everyone.